.. _tutorial_basic:

Harnessing a Simple Program
---------------------------

In this tutorial you will be guided through the steps to harness a
very simple snippet of binary code. Here it is, weighing in at only
two lines of x86 assembly.

.. literalinclude:: ../../tests/square/square.amd64.s
  :language: NASM

The source for this example can be found in the ``tests`` directory of
the repository, in the file ``square.amd64.s``. There are a number of
other small assembly examples there along with it. There is also a
``Makefile`` in that directory and you will have to run ``make`` there
in order to generate the binary code used in this and other tutorials
involving those tests. Once you have run ``make``, the corresponding
binary, which we will harness in this tutorial, will be in the file
``square.amd64.bin``.

A reasonable first step in harnessing is to run SmallWorld's basic
harness script which assumes nothing about the code, and tries to run
it a bunch of times to see what it can deduce. That script,
``basic_harness.py``, lives in the ``examples`` directory. It is
fairly simple, so let's have a look at it.

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/basic_harness.py
  :language: Python

After the imports, the script sets up logging. Logging is probably
self-explanatory (change level to ``logging.DEBUG`` to get lots of
low-level output).

Next, the script asserts an appropriate **platform**. This is a
SmallWorld concept which, essentially, establishes various aspects of
the CPU that will be used to execute instructions. The platform is
used, in this script, to actually create the virutal CPU SmallWorld
will use with this code:
``cpu = smallworld.state.cpus.CPU.for_platform(platform)``
Note: `platform` is also used by other parts of SmallWorld, such as
its analyses, to know endianness, register widths and names, etc.

The cpu **state** is yet another SmallWorld concept (it is explained in
:ref:`state`). You can think of it as a place to set up registers and
memory (which comes with convenient stack and heap abstractions) with
specific initial values in a way that is agnostic to details about any
particular dynamic analysis employing a particular emulator or
engine. Thus, the same state could be applied to a Unicorn
emulator or a angr engine or a PANDA engine or ...

The script next loads the code from the file ``square.amd64.bin`` and
sets its base address to 0x1000, with the lines

.. code-block:: python
		
    code = smallworld.state.memory.code.Executable.from_filepath(
        sys.argv[1], address=0x1000
    )

Then, the script sets the instruction address at which to start
dynamic analysis with ``cpu.pc.set(code.address)`` and also defines an
exit point for an emulator to know when to stop with
``machine.add_exit_point(code.address + code.get_capacity())``.

Once created, ``code`` and ``cpu`` are added to the SmallWorld
``machine``. This is another SmallWorld construct; the **machine**
represents all initial analysis state including register contents
specific to the included cpu and any memory contents.

Next, hinting is set up. **Hinting** is also a SmallWorld
concept. Hints are described in detail in :ref:`hinting` but the basic
idea is that SmallWorld includes various analyses that are intended to
provide hints that can guide the creation of a code harness. Hints can
be read by a human or consumed by other, higher-level analyses. You
can read more about this in :ref:`analyses`.  Here, we create a hinter
and arrange for the method ``collect_hints`` to be called when either
a ``DynamicRegisterValueHint`` or a
``DynamicRegisterValueSummaryHint`` is generated by some
analysis. That method just prints out the hint.

The `basic_harness.py` script employs an analysis called the
*colorizer* which is a kind of poor person's dynamic taint
analysis. Registers are initialized with large random values and
data flows are inferred when those values are observed being used by
subsequent instructions. This can tell us lots of things, but, here,
it will tell us simply what register(s) are inputs for this code.

The colorizer runs code with random intial state. This means the code
can run differently (follow a different path) each time. Each run is a
`micro execution` (inspired by the paper "Micro execution" [#A]_). This
script performs ten micro executions, randomizing uninitialzed
registers before each with the code

.. code-block:: python
		
    seed = 123456
    cs = ColorizerSummary(hinter)
    for i in range(10):
        c = Colorizer(hinter, num_insns=10, exec_id=i)
        perturbed_machine = randomize_uninitialized(machine, seed + i, [])
        c.run(perturbed_machine)
    cs.run(None)

The `ColorizerSummary` analysis summarizes hints across
micro executions. It "runs" after all the colorizer micro executions
and catches all hints output by other analyses connected to the same
hinter.

Note that all of the setup performed is entirely generic; this script
assumes nothing about the binary to be harnessed. To run the script we
just provide a single argument, the binary, to get the commandline
``python3 basic_harnesss.py square.amd64.bin``.

Here is what that outputs

.. command-output:: python3 examples/basic_harness.py tests/square/square.amd64.bin
    :cwd: ../../

The output contains a lot of hints but we only need to look at the
*Summary* ones, which are hints that were emitted by multiple
micro executions. This is the final three lines in that output.  A
`read-def-summary` hint corresponds to a "color" or random value in a
register that is used by an instruction that was not seen before. This
means it is an input to this block of code. There is only one such
hint output by `basic_harness.py`

::
   
    [+] DynamicRegisterValueSummaryHint(message='read-def-summary', pc=4096, color=1, size=4, use=True, new=True, count=10, num_micro_executions=10, reg_name='edi')

The out tells us that the register ``edi`` is an input to this
snippet of code and should really be set explicitly. We can now create
a new script ``square.amd64.py`` which harnesses ``square.amd64.bin``
perfectly, exposing ``edi`` as a command-line argument.

.. literalinclude:: ../../tests/square/square.amd64.py
  :language: Python

And here is what it looks like to run that script, setting ``edi`` to
42 initially.

.. command-output:: python3 ../../tests/square/square.amd64.py 42
    :cwd: ../../tests/square/

Since ``42*42=1764`` which is ``0x6e4`` we have harnessed
``square.amd64.bin`` completely.

.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#A] "Micro execution", Patrice Godefroid, Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Software Engineering, 2014.
