.. _fuzzing:

Fuzzing
=======

Introduction
------------
In this tutorial you will be guided through building a simple fuzzing harness
and fuzzing it with `AFL++`_. It assumes you are already familiar with building a SmallWorld
harness and with `AFL++`_. For this tutorial we will be using a very simple binary that reads
four bytes (which we're going to pretend is a size) and exits if they are 11 or less, then reads 
the next four bytes and compares them one-by-one to the values 98, 97, 100, and 33 exiting if 
they are not equal. If it makes it through all of the compares it crashes by writing to an 
unmapped address.

.. literalinclude:: ../../tests/fuzz/fuzz.amd64.s
  :language: NASM

.. _AFL++: https://aflplus.plus/

The source for this example can be found in the ``tests/fuzz`` directory of the
repository in the file ``fuzz.amd64.s``. This file can be assembled with ``nasm``
with the command ``nasm fuzz.amd64.bin -o fuzz.amd64.bin``.

Building Our Harness
--------------------

Now we need to build a SmallWorld harness for this code. First, we begin be
initializing the machine, platform, cpu, and code. This is done in the same way
as any other SmallWorld harness.

.. literalinclude:: ../../tests/harness/scenarios/fuzz.py
  :language: python
  :lines: 121-129,189-197,233-240

Next, we need somewhere for our input to live. We're going to use a heap to make
things easy. After we create the heap, we're going to put some example input on
it.

.. literalinclude:: ../../tests/harness/scenarios/fuzz.py
  :language: python
  :lines: 240-249

Then we need to set our registers and add everthing to our machine. We set `rip`
to `0x1000` (where we mapped the code) and `rdi` to point to our input.

.. literalinclude:: ../../tests/harness/scenarios/fuzz.py
  :language: python
  :lines: 251-256

Now for the part where most of the work happens. `AFL++`_ is going to generate an input
and hand it to our harness. However, that input is just a series of bytes. We need to
apply that input to our machine. In order to do that we define a callback function. 
The parameters to this callback are specified in the `AFL++`_ documentation for
`Unicorn mode`_. Briefly, the `uc` is a `Unicorn emulator object`_ which you can use to
write the input to memory or registers and `input` is the input generated by `AFL++`_ as
a Python `bytes`. If the input given by `AFL++`_ won't work for your case then you can
return `False` to skip it. 

For our example we will check to make sure the input isn't bigger than our heap and then
just write it to the address of our input.

.. _Unicorn emulator object: https://www.unicorn-engine.org/docs/tutorial.html
.. _Unicorn mode: https://github.com/AFLplusplus/AFLplusplus/blob/stable/unicorn_mode/README.md

.. literalinclude:: ../../tests/harness/scenarios/fuzz.py
  :language: python
  :lines: 200-213

All that's left is to start our emulation. SmallWorld only supports fuzzing with our
`UnicornEmulator`. The only other difference that we end with `machine.fuzz()` and pass
in out input callback.

.. literalinclude:: ../../tests/harness/scenarios/fuzz.py
  :language: python
  :lines: 258-274

And that's it. The maintained implementation now lives in
``tests/harness/scenarios/fuzz.py``; it is just the setup above combined into
one script that calls ``machine.fuzz_with_file(...)`` through
``run_case.py fuzz.afl_fuzz``.

Running With AFL++
------------------
To run the maintained scenario implementation with `AFL++`_ using a command
such as the following:

The example below assumes you have already entered the repository dev shell
with ``nix develop``.

.. code-block:: bash
  
  afl-fuzz -t 10000 -U -m none -i inputs -o outputs -- python3 ../run_case.py fuzz.afl_fuzz amd64 @@


and you should see a TUI that looks like this:

.. literalinclude:: ./afl_output.txt
  :language: none

See the `AFL++`_ documentation for a more complete listing to all of the arguments and options.

Breakdown of an Input
---------------------
Now, lets look at an input the crashed our program. Using `xxd` we have the following::
  
  00000000: ff7f 0000 6261 6421                      ....bad!

As you can see, the first four bytes `ff7f 0000` are an integer greater than 11. Then we have
the bytes `0x62` (98), `0x61` (97), `0x64` (100), and `0x21` (33) which spells `bad!` in ascii.
Note that this input matches what was required as discussed in the introduction of this tutorial.

Fuzzing with the Styx Backend
-----------------------------

SmallWorld can also drive fuzzing through the `Styx`_ firmware-emulator
backend. The harness shape is almost identical to the Unicorn version
above — the differences come down to four pieces:

1. **Architecture coverage.** Styx targets specific firmware platforms and
   currently exposes 32-bit ARM only. The ``StyxEmulator`` backend therefore
   accepts ``armhf`` (mapped to a Cortex-A9 ``CycloneV`` target) and ``armel``
   (Cortex-A9 for ``ARM_V5T``, Cortex-M4 ``Kinetis21`` for ``ARM_V6M``);
   constructing one with any other architecture raises ``ConfigurationError``.

2. **Emulator class.** ``smallworld.emulators.StyxEmulator(platform)``
   replaces ``UnicornEmulator(platform)``. Memory map / register writes /
   exit-point setup all use the existing ``Emulator`` API; the Styx backend
   defers the underlying ``Processor`` build until the first ``run()`` /
   ``step()`` call, so register/memory configuration done by ``machine.apply``
   is replayed automatically when emulation begins.

3. **Input callback signature.** The callback still has the
   ``(handle, input_bytes, persistent_round, data)`` shape `AFL++`_ uses, but
   ``handle`` is now a ``styx_emulator.Processor`` rather than a Unicorn
   ``Uc``. The analogue of ``uc.mem_write(addr, bytes)`` is
   ``processor.write_data(addr, bytes)``.

4. **Fuzz entry point.** Instead of ``machine.fuzz_with_file(...)`` /
   ``machine.fuzz()`` (which route to ``unicornafl``), Styx harnesses use
   ``machine.fuzz_with_styx(...)`` / ``machine.fuzz_styx()`` (which route to
   the in-tree ``styxafl`` Rust+PyO3 bridge crate). Helpers in
   ``smallworld.helpers`` also accept ``engine="styx"`` to pick the Styx
   path from a one-liner.

.. _Styx: https://github.com/styx-emulator/styx-emulator

Reproducing the Earlier Harness with Styx
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The maintained Styx fuzz scenario lives in
``tests/harness/scenarios/styx_fuzz.py`` and is registered under the
``"styx"`` and ``"styx.afl_fuzz"`` scenario names. It runs the same
``fuzz.<arch>.bin`` binary used above; you can invoke it via
``run_case.py``::

  python3 tests/run_case.py styx armhf
  python3 tests/run_case.py styx armhf -c   # crashing input

The platform/cpu/code/heap setup is the same as the Unicorn harness:

.. literalinclude:: ../../tests/harness/scenarios/styx_fuzz.py
  :language: python
  :lines: 38-54,148-162

The input lives on the heap exactly as before:

.. literalinclude:: ../../tests/harness/scenarios/styx_fuzz.py
  :language: python
  :lines: 164-171

Registers and machine assembly are likewise the same:

.. literalinclude:: ../../tests/harness/scenarios/styx_fuzz.py
  :language: python
  :lines: 173-178

The input callback is where the API shape matters most. ``processor`` is a
``styx_emulator.Processor`` and exposes ``write_data(addr, bytes)``:

.. literalinclude:: ../../tests/harness/scenarios/styx_fuzz.py
  :language: python
  :lines: 180-186

Finally, build a ``StyxEmulator``, add the exit point, and call
``machine.fuzz_with_styx`` with the seed file `AFL++`_ will mutate:

.. literalinclude:: ../../tests/harness/scenarios/styx_fuzz.py
  :language: python
  :lines: 188-190

Running with AFL++
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once the harness is in place, the Styx variant runs under `AFL++`_ exactly
the same way as the Unicorn variant — only the scenario name changes:

.. code-block:: bash

   afl-fuzz -t 10000 -U -m none -i inputs -o outputs -- python3 ../run_case.py styx.afl_fuzz armhf @@

The ``styxafl`` bridge also has a fallback mode: when ``__AFL_SHM_ID`` is
not set (i.e. you're running without ``afl-fuzz`` wrapping the harness),
it runs a single iteration of your ``input_callback`` against the file
you point it at and then exits. This is what the integration test
``fuzz_tutorial:styx:armhf`` exercises — a useful smoke check for harness
correctness before plugging it into a real fuzzing campaign.

Known limitations of the Styx fuzz path:

* Styx has no 64-bit ARM and no x86_64 target. ``aarch64`` harnesses must
  continue using ``UnicornEmulator``.
* SmallWorld function hooks installed via ``QFunctionHookable`` (e.g. the
  ``hooking`` test family's ``gets``/``puts`` models) don't yet round-trip
  cleanly through Styx — the body-skip-via-PC-redirect heuristic doesn't
  match Styx's hook semantics. Stick to bare-metal harnesses for now.
* MMIO-dependent scenarios (``dma``) won't work out of the box because the
  CycloneV target's memory map doesn't include the addresses those tests
  use.

Next Steps
----------
If you are interested in a more in depth tutorial on using SmallWorld for vulnerability
research (including fuzzing), then checkout our in depth tutorial on using SmallWorld to
analyize an RTOS found in the repo under `use_cases/rtos_demo`.
